README.md, before:

# (WIP) OpenTelemetry Lazy Backend

The OTel Lazy Backend is not supposed to replace OTel Collector and its components, but is useful to
debug raw OTel signals such as profiles. The main reason it exists is that production-grade backends
that support profiles are not created equal and many of them loose important details or lag behind
the latest profiles definition.

``` mermaid
flowchart LR
  opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler
  opentelemetry-lazybackend
  clickhouse@{ shape: cyl, label: "ClickHouse" }
  sqlite@{ shape: cyl, label: "SQLite" }
  stdout["Stdout"]
  prometheus@{ shape: cyl, label: "Prometheus" }

  opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler e1@--> opentelemetry-lazybackend
  opentelemetry-lazybackend e2@--> clickhouse
  opentelemetry-lazybackend e3@--> sqlite
  opentelemetry-lazybackend e4@--> stdout
  opentelemetry-lazybackend e5@--> prometheus

  e1@{ animate: true }
  e2@{ animate: true }
  e3@{ animate: true }
  e4@{ animate: true }
  e5@{ animate: true }
```

## Quickstart Guide

1. Start by generating OTel profiles. One way to do that is to run the OTel eBPF profiler. Since it
   has not officially been released yet, I'm usually building it from sources and running as follows.

   ```
   git clone git@github.com:open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler.git
   cd opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler
   ```

   ```
   make agent
   ```

   :coffee: :coffee: :coffee:

   ``` console
   $ sudo ./ebpf-profiler -collection-agent="localhost:4137" -disable-tls
   INFO[0000] Starting OTEL profiling agent v0.0.0 (revision main-69066441, build timestamp 1758215582) 
   INFO[0000] Interpreter tracers: perl,php,python,hotspot,ruby,v8,dotnet,go,labels 
   INFO[0000] Found offsets: task stack 0x20, pt_regs 0x3f58, tpbase 0x2468 
   INFO[0000] Supports generic eBPF map batch operations   
   INFO[0000] Supports LPM trie eBPF map batch operations  
   INFO[0000] eBPF tracer loaded                           
   INFO[0000] Attached tracer program                      
   INFO[0000] Attached sched monitor                       
   ```

2. Start the OTel Lazy Backend with the default config to receive profiles and print them to the
   standard output.

   ```
   git@github.com:danielpacak/opentelemetry-lazybackend.git
   cd opentelemetry-lazybackend
   ```

   ```
   go build
   ```

   ``` console
   $ ./opentelemetry-lazybackend
   --------------- New Resource Profile --------------
     container.id: 6d7d5c336f79fbfae3e76c4a25b2c3805ffa74ab4c6145d4219ec2b92185fb6f
   ------------------- New Profile -------------------
     ProfileID: 00000000000000000000000000000000
     Time: 2025-09-23 04:55:35.51787723 +0000 UTC
     Duration: 1970-01-01 00:00:02.840298447 +0000 UTC
     PeriodType: [cpu, nanoseconds, Unspecified]
     Period: 50000000
     Dropped attributes count: 0
     SampleType: samples
   ------------------- New Sample --------------------
     Timestamp[0]: 1758603335517877230 (2025-09-23 06:55:35.51787723 +0200 CEST)
     thread.name: etcd
     process.executable.name: etcd
     process.executable.path: /usr/local/bin/etcd
     process.pid: 3086
     thread.id: 11322
   ---------------------------------------------------
   Instrumentation: kernel, Function: do_syscall_64, File: , Line: 0, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: kernel, Function: entry_SYSCALL_64_after_hwframe, File: , Line: 0, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.futex, File: runtime/sys_linux_amd64.s, Line: 558, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.futexsleep, File: runtime/os_linux.go, Line: 69, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.notesleep, File: runtime/lock_futex.go, Line: 171, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.stopm, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 1762, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.findRunnable, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 3147, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.schedule, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 3868, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.park_m, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 4037, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.mcall, File: runtime/asm_amd64.s, Line: 459, Column: 0
   ------------------- End Sample --------------------
   ------------------- New Sample --------------------
     Timestamp[0]: 1758603337408146688 (2025-09-23 06:55:37.408146688 +0200 CEST)
     Timestamp[1]: 1758603337358132101 (2025-09-23 06:55:37.358132101 +0200 CEST)
     Timestamp[2]: 1758603338358175677 (2025-09-23 06:55:38.358175677 +0200 CEST)
     thread.name: etcd
     process.executable.name: etcd
     process.executable.path: /usr/local/bin/etcd
     process.pid: 3086
     thread.id: 3421
   ---------------------------------------------------
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.pidleget, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 6569, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.findRunnable, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 3482, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.schedule, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 3868, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.park_m, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 4037, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.mcall, File: runtime/asm_amd64.s, Line: 459, Column: 0
   ------------------- End Sample --------------------
   ------------------- End Profile -------------------
   -------------- End Resource Profile ---------------
   ```

## Docker

```
docker buildx build --platform=linux/amd64 --load \
  --tag docker.io/danielpacak/opentelemetry-lazybackend:latest .
```

```
docker run --rm  --name lazybackend -p 4137:4137 -p 2112:2112 \
  docker.io/danielpacak/opentelemetry-lazybackend:latest \
  -address 0.0.0.0:4137 \
  -metrics 0.0.0.0:2112
```

## Similar Projects

Notice that the OTel Debug Exporter supports profiles, but is pretty useless because it dumps symbol
tables separated from stack traces, which makes it too verbose and hard to read.

As an alternative to the OTel Lazy Backend you may consider [devfiler].

[devfiler]: https://github.com/elastic/devfiler

Commit message:

example: use Prometheus receiver to show functions distribution

README.md, after:

# (WIP) OpenTelemetry Lazy Backend

The OTel Lazy Backend is not supposed to replace OTel Collector and its components, but is useful to
debug raw OTel signals such as profiles. The main reason it exists is that production-grade backends
that support profiles are not created equal and many of them loose important details or lag behind
the latest profiles definition.

``` mermaid
flowchart LR
  opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler
  opentelemetry-lazybackend
  clickhouse@{ shape: cyl, label: "ClickHouse" }
  sqlite@{ shape: cyl, label: "SQLite" }
  stdout["Stdout"]
  prometheus@{ shape: cyl, label: "Prometheus" }

  opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler e1@--> opentelemetry-lazybackend
  opentelemetry-lazybackend e2@--> clickhouse
  opentelemetry-lazybackend e3@--> sqlite
  opentelemetry-lazybackend e4@--> stdout
  opentelemetry-lazybackend e5@--> prometheus

  e1@{ animate: true }
  e2@{ animate: true }
  e3@{ animate: true }
  e4@{ animate: true }
  e5@{ animate: true }
```

## Quickstart Guide

1. Start by generating OTel profiles. One way to do that is to run the OTel eBPF profiler. Since it
   has not officially been released yet, I'm usually building it from sources and running as follows.

   ```
   git clone git@github.com:open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler.git
   cd opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler
   ```

   ```
   make agent
   ```

   :coffee: :coffee: :coffee:

   ``` console
   $ sudo ./ebpf-profiler -collection-agent="localhost:4137" -disable-tls
   INFO[0000] Starting OTEL profiling agent v0.0.0 (revision main-69066441, build timestamp 1758215582) 
   INFO[0000] Interpreter tracers: perl,php,python,hotspot,ruby,v8,dotnet,go,labels 
   INFO[0000] Found offsets: task stack 0x20, pt_regs 0x3f58, tpbase 0x2468 
   INFO[0000] Supports generic eBPF map batch operations   
   INFO[0000] Supports LPM trie eBPF map batch operations  
   INFO[0000] eBPF tracer loaded                           
   INFO[0000] Attached tracer program                      
   INFO[0000] Attached sched monitor                       
   ```

2. Start the OTel Lazy Backend with the default config to receive profiles and print them to the
   standard output.

   ```
   git@github.com:danielpacak/opentelemetry-lazybackend.git
   cd opentelemetry-lazybackend
   ```

   ```
   go build
   ```

   ``` console
   $ ./opentelemetry-lazybackend
   --------------- New Resource Profile --------------
     container.id: 6d7d5c336f79fbfae3e76c4a25b2c3805ffa74ab4c6145d4219ec2b92185fb6f
   ------------------- New Profile -------------------
     ProfileID: 00000000000000000000000000000000
     Time: 2025-09-23 04:55:35.51787723 +0000 UTC
     Duration: 1970-01-01 00:00:02.840298447 +0000 UTC
     PeriodType: [cpu, nanoseconds, Unspecified]
     Period: 50000000
     Dropped attributes count: 0
     SampleType: samples
   ------------------- New Sample --------------------
     Timestamp[0]: 1758603335517877230 (2025-09-23 06:55:35.51787723 +0200 CEST)
     thread.name: etcd
     process.executable.name: etcd
     process.executable.path: /usr/local/bin/etcd
     process.pid: 3086
     thread.id: 11322
   ---------------------------------------------------
   Instrumentation: kernel, Function: do_syscall_64, File: , Line: 0, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: kernel, Function: entry_SYSCALL_64_after_hwframe, File: , Line: 0, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.futex, File: runtime/sys_linux_amd64.s, Line: 558, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.futexsleep, File: runtime/os_linux.go, Line: 69, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.notesleep, File: runtime/lock_futex.go, Line: 171, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.stopm, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 1762, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.findRunnable, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 3147, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.schedule, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 3868, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.park_m, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 4037, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.mcall, File: runtime/asm_amd64.s, Line: 459, Column: 0
   ------------------- End Sample --------------------
   ------------------- New Sample --------------------
     Timestamp[0]: 1758603337408146688 (2025-09-23 06:55:37.408146688 +0200 CEST)
     Timestamp[1]: 1758603337358132101 (2025-09-23 06:55:37.358132101 +0200 CEST)
     Timestamp[2]: 1758603338358175677 (2025-09-23 06:55:38.358175677 +0200 CEST)
     thread.name: etcd
     process.executable.name: etcd
     process.executable.path: /usr/local/bin/etcd
     process.pid: 3086
     thread.id: 3421
   ---------------------------------------------------
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.pidleget, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 6569, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.findRunnable, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 3482, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.schedule, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 3868, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.park_m, File: runtime/proc.go, Line: 4037, Column: 0
   Instrumentation: go, Function: runtime.mcall, File: runtime/asm_amd64.s, Line: 459, Column: 0
   ------------------- End Sample --------------------
   ------------------- End Profile -------------------
   -------------- End Resource Profile ---------------
   ```

## Docker

```
docker buildx build --platform=linux/amd64 --load \
  --tag docker.io/danielpacak/opentelemetry-lazybackend:latest .
```

```
docker run --rm  --name lazybackend -p 4137:4137 -p 2112:2112 \
  docker.io/danielpacak/opentelemetry-lazybackend:latest \
  -address 0.0.0.0:4137 \
  -metrics 0.0.0.0:2112
```

## Prometheus Receiver

The Prometheus receiver allows gathering some stats about received profiles, stack traces, and functions.
For example, the following Grafana dashboard shows the distribution of functions grouped by
process executable name and language (= frame type).

![](./docs/grafana-functions-distribution.png)

## Similar Projects

Notice that the OTel Debug Exporter supports profiles, but is pretty useless because it dumps symbol
tables separated from stack traces, which makes it too verbose and hard to read.

As an alternative to the OTel Lazy Backend you may consider [devfiler].

[devfiler]: https://github.com/elastic/devfiler
